---
layout: post
title:  "Clojure - My Thoughts So Far"
date:   2016-06-05 20:00:00 -0400
categories: posts 
disqus_id: 4ae82e2b-b321-426f-86e0-09c7ac1099cb
tags: [ clojure functional-programming ]
---

For the last month or so, I've been writing blog posts in conjunction with a few
other guys. Each week, we pick an open-ended topic, and try to write something
about it. It's been a lot of fun and has been useful for keeping myself
motivated to keep writing and to come up with my own opinions about various
programming topics. Anyway, this week, we chose "functional programming" as our
topic, and so I thought I'd take the opportunity to talk a little bit about
Clojure. 

I've been messing around with Clojure for several months, and I've come to like
the language a lot. I first started experimenting with Clojure because I wanted
to learn how to use [Overtone](http://overtone.github.io/). Overtone is a music programming
library for Clojure and is a ton of fun to play around with. I've given a few
talks about Overtone too - probably the best of which was my [Lightning Talk at
Pillarcon](https://github.com/epiccoleman/pillarcon-overtone-lightning-talk). 

Writing code in Clojure is a lot different than what I'm used to, but there's a
lot I really like about the language. Firstly, Clojure was my first exposure to the sort of "classic"
functional programming operations, like `map`, `reduce`, and `filter`. Just
having those three concepts in my head has changed the way I've approached a lot
of problems, and lots of languages have them built in these days. I also have
come to like the consistent syntax of Clojure and Lisp in general - left paren,
function name, args, right paren, pretty much 100% of the time. A lot of imperative and object oriented
languages mix various syntaxes together, sacrificing consistency for
readability. There are pros and cons for each approach, but I think a lot of the
time I prefer the Lisp syntax - it makes it easy to parse code as you read it.
You can find the innermost set of parens, evaluate it mentally, and then rinse
and repeat recursively until you reach the outermost braces (that's what the
computer's doing). I think it makes it easier to break problems down, and it
certainly makes it easier to write tests, especially since functional
programming tends to minimize side effects and methods that return differently
based on program state. You also end up writing code by
composing many small actions together, which I think is easier to reason
about. One last benefit of writing code in this style is that it's easy to
extract pieces and run them in the REPL - or, if you've got it set up, right in
your editor. 

I edit Clojure in Vim, and there's a
lot of great plugins to make it easier. I'm a huge fan of
[vim-fireplace](https://github.com/tpope/vim-fireplace) which adds REPL
functionality to the editor (it's seriously awesome). There's also
[vim-clojure-static](https://github.com/guns/vim-clojure-static) which adds
general language support features to Vim. Depending on your version, this might
be built into Vim. I haven't found a great
solution to dealing with the parens - there's
[paredit](https://github.com/vim-scripts/paredit.vim) which seems to be the most
popular solution, but it also DEMANDS that you keep your braces matched and I
have had trouble doing certain operations because the plugin will prevent you
from making them uneven. For what it's worth, it seems to me like paredit is
very powerful - I just haven't really taken the time to learn it well enough for
it to do more good than harm.  

As cool as Overtone is, it's basically all I did with Clojure for the first few
months that I used it, and I feel like working in a small subset of Clojure has
made my experience less general than I'd have liked. I learned a lot of the basics of the language from the
[120 Hour Epic Sax
Maration](http://iloveponies.github.io/120-hour-epic-sax-marathon/) which is
definitely a great resource for starting out, but I feel like I still have a TON
to learn about the language. I've only written really basic code with the
language so far, and I still need to wrap my head around smart ways to organize
code in a functional way. I'm so used to the typical object-oriented paradigms
that this kind of bends my brain a little. You can kind of approximate the idea
of an object by using maps to store data and even functions, but that
analogy only takes you so far- for example, let's say I'm making a Character
"object" for the [Evercraft Kata](INSERT LINK TO POST), and I start with
something like this: 

{% highlight clojure %}
(def character {:name "Nathan Explosion"})
{% endhighlight %}

That's all great, and you don't have to write getters or anything because that's
just built into hashmaps. But if I want to validate an argument, there's no way
to do that. Clojure has a few different ways of solving these problems, such as
records and handling state through atoms, so the functionality is there - it's
just that you have to relearn certain things or learn the right way to do things
functionally that's the tricky bit.

I still have a long way to go with Clojure, but I'm having a lot of fun
learning. I've been going through [Living
Clojure](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920034292.do) to shore up my skills
even further. This is an awesome book if you're interested in learning - it goes
quickly enough to not be boring, but takes you through all the basics and gets
into some of what makes Clojure special. It also includes a "training program"
with daily problems to work as you progress your skills. I'm also pretty
interested in [Clojure
Applied](https://pragprog.com/book/vmclojeco/clojure-applied) and will probably
be getting a copy once I finish reading Living Clojure - this book seems to be
focused on real world examples of Clojure in action, and has a section on
testing, which tends to get neglected in tutorials and documentation. 

All in all, I would definitely recommend checking out Clojure if you're at all
interested. There's a great community and great materials to help you learn, and
I've noticed myself thinking about certain problems in different ways since I've
started learning a functional language. There's a lot of exciting things you can
do with Clojure - there's [Overtone](http://overtone.github.io/), frontend and
backend web dev libraries like [Ring](https://github.com/ring-clojure) and [Reagent](https://reagent-project.github.io/) (which
actually uses ClojureScript, essentially Clojure that compiles to
JavaScript), and even [interfaces for React Native](http://cljsrn.org/) that can
enable writing mobile apps in Clojure. Clojure's JVM interoperability is also
quite powerful and makes it a practical and widely supported language. Most
importantly, Clojure is a lot of fun, which I think is the real reason that I've
managed to stay interested for so long. Go check it out - you'll get over the
parens. And as always, thanks for reading!
